README.md, before:

cacheutils
==========

The cacheutils is an extension module for [crash utility][1] that lists dentry
caches and dumps page caches associated with a specified file path in a vmcore.
The module allows you to find and see page caches of log/config files in your
vmcore.

**NOTE**: To take full advantage of the module, a vmcore needs to be captured
without excluding page caches by [makedumpfile][2].

Getting Started
---------------

The module requires crash-7.2.7 or later.

To build the module from the top-level `crash-<version>` directory, enter:

    $ cp <path-to>/cacheutils.c extensions
    $ make extensions

To load the module's commands to a running crash session, enter:

    crash> extend <path-to>/crashutils.so

To show the module's commands, enter:

    crash> extend
    SHARED OBJECT            COMMANDS
    <path-to>/cacheutils.so  ccat cls cfind

Help Pages
----------

```
NAME
  cls - list dentry and inode caches

SYNOPSIS
  cls [-adlU] [-n pid|task] abspath...

DESCRIPTION
  This command displays the addresses of dentry, inode and nrpages of a
  specified absolute path and its subdirs if they exist in dentry cache.

    -a  also display negative dentries in the subdirs list.
    -d  display the directory itself only, without its contents.
    -l  use a long format to display mode, size and mtime additionally.
    -U  do not sort, list dentries in directory order.

  For kernels supporting mount namespaces, the -n option may be used to
  specify a task that has the target namespace:

    -n pid   a process PID.
    -n task  a hexadecimal task_struct pointer.

EXAMPLE
  Display the "/var/log/messages" regular file's information:

    crash> cls /var/log/messages
    DENTRY           INODE            NRPAGES   % PATH
    ffff9c0c28fda480 ffff9c0c22c675b8     220 100 /var/log/messages

  The '%' column shows the percentage of cached pages in the file.

  Display the "/var/log" directory and its subdirs information:

    crash> cls /var/log
    DENTRY           INODE            NRPAGES   % PATH
    ffff9c0c3eabe300 ffff9c0c3e875b78       0   0 ./
    ffff9c0c16a22900 ffff9c0c16ada2f8       0   0 anaconda/
    ffff9c0c37611000 ffff9c0c3759f5b8       0   0 audit/
    ffff9c0c375ccc00 ffff9c0c3761c8b8       1 100 btmp
    ffff9c0c28fda240 ffff9c0c22c713f8       6 100 cron
    ffff9c0c3eb7f180 ffff9c0bfd402a78      36   7 dnf.librepo.log
    ...

  In addition to the same information, display their mode, size and mtime:

    crash> cls -l /var/log
    DENTRY           INODE            NRPAGES   %   MODE        SIZE MTIME                         PATH
    ffff9c0c3eabe300 ffff9c0c3e875b78       0   0  40755        4096 2018-11-25.03:39:01.479315763 ./
    ffff9c0c16a22900 ffff9c0c16ada2f8       0   0  40755         250 2018-03-21.13:18:38.816000000 anaconda/
    ffff9c0c37611000 ffff9c0c3759f5b8       0   0  40700          80 2018-10-25.19:02:13.968692776 audit/
    ffff9c0c375ccc00 ffff9c0c3761c8b8       1 100 100660         384 2018-11-28.16:39:34.538315763 btmp
    ffff9c0c28fda240 ffff9c0c22c713f8       6 100 100600       23435 2018-11-28.16:01:01.667315763 cron
    ffff9c0c3eb7f180 ffff9c0bfd402a78      36   7 100600     1921580 2018-11-28.16:41:24.073315763 dnf.librepo.log
    ...

  Display the "/var/log" directory itself only:

    crash> cls -d /var/log
    DENTRY           INODE            NRPAGES   % PATH
    ffff9c0c3eabe300 ffff9c0c3e875b78       0   0 /var/log/
```
```
NAME
  ccat - dump page caches

SYNOPSIS
  ccat    [-S] [-n pid|task] abspath|inode [outfile]
  ccat -d [-S] [-n pid|task] abspath outdir

DESCRIPTION
  This command dumps the page caches of a specified inode or path like
  "cat" command.

       -d  extract a directory and its contents to outdir.
       -S  do not fseek() and ftruncate() to outfile in order to
           create a non-sparse file.
    inode  a hexadecimal inode pointer.
  abspath  the absolute path of a file (or directory with the -d option).
  outfile  a file path to be written. If a file already exists there,
           the command fails.
   outdir  a directory path to be created by the -d option.

  For kernels supporting mount namespaces, the -n option may be used to
  specify a task that has the target namespace:

    -n pid   a process PID.
    -n task  a hexadecimal task_struct pointer.

EXAMPLE
  Dump the existing page caches of the "/var/log/messages" file:

    crash> ccat /var/log/messages
    Sep 16 03:13:01 host systemd: Started Session 559694 of user root.
    Sep 16 03:13:01 host systemd: Starting Session 559694 of user root.
    Sep 16 03:13:39 host dnsmasq-dhcp[24341]: DHCPREQUEST(virbr0) 192.168
    Sep 16 03:13:39 host dnsmasq-dhcp[24341]: DHCPACK(virbr0) 192.168.122
    ...

  Restore the size and data offset of the "messages" file as well to the
  "messages.sparse" file even if some of its page caches don't exist, so
  it could become sparse:

    crash> ccat /var/log/messages messages.sparse

  Create the non-sparse "messages.non-sparse" file:

    crash> ccat -S /var/log/messages messages.non-sparse

  NOTE: Redirecting to a file will also works, but it can contain crash's
  messages, so specifying an outfile is recommended for restoring a file.

  Extract the "/var/log" directory and its contents to the new "/tmp/log"
  directory with one command:

    crash> ccat -d /var/log /tmp/log
```
```
NAME
  cfind - search for files in a directory hierarchy

SYNOPSIS
  cfind [-ac] [-n pid|task] abspath

DESCRIPTION
  This command searches for files in a directory hierarchy across mounted
  file systems like a "find" command.

    -a  also display negative dentries.
    -c  count dentries in each directory.

  For kernels supporting mount namespaces, the -n option may be used to
  specify a task that has the target namespace:

    -n pid   a process PID.
    -n task  a hexadecimal task_struct pointer.

EXAMPLE
  Search for "messages" files through the root file system with the grep
  command:

    crash> cfind / | grep messages
    ffff88010113be00 /var/log/messages
    ffff880449f86b40 /usr/lib/python2.7/site-packages/babel/messages

  Count dentries in the /boot directory and its subdirectories:

    crash> cfind -c /boot
      TOTAL DENTRY N_DENT PATH
         18     12      6 /boot
          8      6      2 /boot/grub2
         34     34      0 /boot/grub2/locale
        268    268      0 /boot/grub2/i386-pc
          1      1      0 /boot/grub2/fonts
          1      1      0 /boot/efi
          2      1      1 /boot/efi/EFI
          3      0      3 /boot/efi/EFI/redhat
        335    323     12 TOTAL
```

Tested Kernels
--------------

- RHEL5 to RHEL8 (x86_64)
- Linux 2.6.16 to 5.4 (x86_64 and i686)

Related Links
-------------

- [crash utility][1] (https://people.redhat.com/anderson/)
- [makedumpfile][2] (https://sourceforge.net/projects/makedumpfile/)

[1]: https://people.redhat.com/anderson/
[2]: https://sourceforge.net/projects/makedumpfile/

Author
------

- Kazuhito Hagio &lt;k-hagio@ab.jp.nec.com&gt;

Commit message:

Add "ccat -c" option to count the total pages to be written
Signed-off-by: Kazuhito Hagio <k-hagio@ab.jp.nec.com>

README.md, after:

cacheutils
==========

The cacheutils is an extension module for [crash utility][1] that lists dentry
caches and dumps page caches associated with a specified file path in a vmcore.
The module allows you to find and see page caches of log/config files in your
vmcore.

**NOTE**: To take full advantage of the module, a vmcore needs to be captured
without excluding page caches by [makedumpfile][2].

Getting Started
---------------

The module requires crash-7.2.7 or later.

To build the module from the top-level `crash-<version>` directory, enter:

    $ cp <path-to>/cacheutils.c extensions
    $ make extensions

To load the module's commands to a running crash session, enter:

    crash> extend <path-to>/crashutils.so

To show the module's commands, enter:

    crash> extend
    SHARED OBJECT            COMMANDS
    <path-to>/cacheutils.so  ccat cls cfind

Help Pages
----------

```
NAME
  cls - list dentry and inode caches

SYNOPSIS
  cls [-adlU] [-n pid|task] abspath...

DESCRIPTION
  This command displays the addresses of dentry, inode and nrpages of a
  specified absolute path and its subdirs if they exist in dentry cache.

    -a  also display negative dentries in the subdirs list.
    -d  display the directory itself only, without its contents.
    -l  use a long format to display mode, size and mtime additionally.
    -U  do not sort, list dentries in directory order.

  For kernels supporting mount namespaces, the -n option may be used to
  specify a task that has the target namespace:

    -n pid   a process PID.
    -n task  a hexadecimal task_struct pointer.

EXAMPLE
  Display the "/var/log/messages" regular file's information:

    crash> cls /var/log/messages
    DENTRY           INODE            NRPAGES   % PATH
    ffff9c0c28fda480 ffff9c0c22c675b8     220 100 /var/log/messages

  The '%' column shows the percentage of cached pages in the file.

  Display the "/var/log" directory and its subdirs information:

    crash> cls /var/log
    DENTRY           INODE            NRPAGES   % PATH
    ffff9c0c3eabe300 ffff9c0c3e875b78       0   0 ./
    ffff9c0c16a22900 ffff9c0c16ada2f8       0   0 anaconda/
    ffff9c0c37611000 ffff9c0c3759f5b8       0   0 audit/
    ffff9c0c375ccc00 ffff9c0c3761c8b8       1 100 btmp
    ffff9c0c28fda240 ffff9c0c22c713f8       6 100 cron
    ffff9c0c3eb7f180 ffff9c0bfd402a78      36   7 dnf.librepo.log
    ...

  In addition to the same information, display their mode, size and mtime:

    crash> cls -l /var/log
    DENTRY           INODE            NRPAGES   %   MODE        SIZE MTIME                         PATH
    ffff9c0c3eabe300 ffff9c0c3e875b78       0   0  40755        4096 2018-11-25.03:39:01.479315763 ./
    ffff9c0c16a22900 ffff9c0c16ada2f8       0   0  40755         250 2018-03-21.13:18:38.816000000 anaconda/
    ffff9c0c37611000 ffff9c0c3759f5b8       0   0  40700          80 2018-10-25.19:02:13.968692776 audit/
    ffff9c0c375ccc00 ffff9c0c3761c8b8       1 100 100660         384 2018-11-28.16:39:34.538315763 btmp
    ffff9c0c28fda240 ffff9c0c22c713f8       6 100 100600       23435 2018-11-28.16:01:01.667315763 cron
    ffff9c0c3eb7f180 ffff9c0bfd402a78      36   7 100600     1921580 2018-11-28.16:41:24.073315763 dnf.librepo.log
    ...

  Display the "/var/log" directory itself only:

    crash> cls -d /var/log
    DENTRY           INODE            NRPAGES   % PATH
    ffff9c0c3eabe300 ffff9c0c3e875b78       0   0 /var/log/
```
```
NAME
  ccat - dump page caches

SYNOPSIS
  ccat    [-cS] [-n pid|task] abspath|inode [outfile]
  ccat -d [-cS] [-n pid|task] abspath outdir

DESCRIPTION
  This command dumps the page caches of a specified inode or path like
  "cat" command.

       -c  only count the total pages to be written without creating any
           files or directories.
       -d  extract a directory and its contents to outdir.
       -S  do not fseek() and ftruncate() to outfile in order to
           create a non-sparse file.
    inode  a hexadecimal inode pointer.
  abspath  the absolute path of a file (or directory with the -d option).
  outfile  a file path to be written. If a file already exists there,
           the command fails.
   outdir  a directory path to be created by the -d option.

  For kernels supporting mount namespaces, the -n option may be used to
  specify a task that has the target namespace:

    -n pid   a process PID.
    -n task  a hexadecimal task_struct pointer.

EXAMPLE
  Dump the existing page caches of the "/var/log/messages" file:

    crash> ccat /var/log/messages
    Sep 16 03:13:01 host systemd: Started Session 559694 of user root.
    Sep 16 03:13:01 host systemd: Starting Session 559694 of user root.
    Sep 16 03:13:39 host dnsmasq-dhcp[24341]: DHCPREQUEST(virbr0) 192.168
    Sep 16 03:13:39 host dnsmasq-dhcp[24341]: DHCPACK(virbr0) 192.168.122
    ...

  Restore the size and data offset of the "messages" file as well to the
  "messages.sparse" file even if some of its page caches don't exist, so
  it could become sparse:

    crash> ccat /var/log/messages messages.sparse

  Create the non-sparse "messages.non-sparse" file:

    crash> ccat -S /var/log/messages messages.non-sparse

  NOTE: Redirecting to a file will also works, but it can contain crash's
  messages, so specifying an outfile is recommended for restoring a file.

  Extract the "/var/log" directory and its contents to the new "/tmp/log"
  directory with one command:

    crash> ccat -d /var/log /tmp/log
    Extracting /var/log to /tmp/log...
    Total 127034 pages (508136 KiB)

  Count the total pages to be written in advance without creating any
  files or directories:

    crash> ccat -c -d /var/log /tmp/log
    Estimating /var/log...
    Total 127034 pages (508136 KiB)
```
```
NAME
  cfind - search for files in a directory hierarchy

SYNOPSIS
  cfind [-ac] [-n pid|task] abspath

DESCRIPTION
  This command searches for files in a directory hierarchy across mounted
  file systems like a "find" command.

    -a  also display negative dentries.
    -c  count dentries in each directory.

  For kernels supporting mount namespaces, the -n option may be used to
  specify a task that has the target namespace:

    -n pid   a process PID.
    -n task  a hexadecimal task_struct pointer.

EXAMPLE
  Search for "messages" files through the root file system with the grep
  command:

    crash> cfind / | grep messages
    ffff88010113be00 /var/log/messages
    ffff880449f86b40 /usr/lib/python2.7/site-packages/babel/messages

  Count dentries in the /boot directory and its subdirectories:

    crash> cfind -c /boot
      TOTAL DENTRY N_DENT PATH
         18     12      6 /boot
          8      6      2 /boot/grub2
         34     34      0 /boot/grub2/locale
        268    268      0 /boot/grub2/i386-pc
          1      1      0 /boot/grub2/fonts
          1      1      0 /boot/efi
          2      1      1 /boot/efi/EFI
          3      0      3 /boot/efi/EFI/redhat
        335    323     12 TOTAL
```

Tested Kernels
--------------

- RHEL5 to RHEL8 (x86_64)
- Linux 2.6.16 to 5.4 (x86_64 and i686)

Related Links
-------------

- [crash utility][1] (https://people.redhat.com/anderson/)
- [makedumpfile][2] (https://sourceforge.net/projects/makedumpfile/)

[1]: https://people.redhat.com/anderson/
[2]: https://sourceforge.net/projects/makedumpfile/

Author
------

- Kazuhito Hagio &lt;k-hagio@ab.jp.nec.com&gt;
